--- 
  feed: false
  category: philosophy
  kind: article
  title: The Ph in a Bioinformatics PhD
  date: "2007-08-28 18:22:59"
---

In a month, I start the third and final year of my PhD. Usually it's around
this time that students begin thinking about what's gone before and
contemplate the future, and I'm never one to buck a trend.

I did a master's degree in bioinformatics, where before I had never used a
computer for anything other than email and browsing. On completion, I was
proficient in Java, R, MySQL, and Linux, all the hard skills I need as a
bioinformatician. The informatics in bioinformatics, if you like. I look back
on my masters in a positive light, hard work, but I made some good friends,
learnt a great deal, and left with high expectations, certain of the career
I've chosen.

I started my PhD, straight after my masters. My hard skills may have improved
slightly, I've become more proficient in R, but what I have learnt more, are
the soft skills that a bioinformatician needs. Less tangible than command line
piping, but equally as important, these include: dealing with failure, being an
independent researcher, dealing with failure, self-discipline, dealing with
failure, what qualifies as publishable data, and dealing with failure.

So as I plan whether to stay in science, or look outside the field (Anyone at
Google reading this?), here are the three main thoughts, inspired by
[indexed][], that are occupying my mind, for your consideration.

#### The meaning of hard work

<%= image amzn("ph-in-phd/success.png"), 'Graph showing hard work versus results ', 330 %>

#### Two things that are important

<%= image amzn("ph-in-phd/familyplot.png"), 'Spending time with friends and family or working on publications', 330 %>

#### I've been two of these

<%= image amzn("ph-in-phd/reward.png"), 'Passion versus reward.', 330  %>

[indexed]: http://thisisindexed.com/
