---
kind: article
title: Introduction
prefix: true
date: "2012-07-09 00:00:00"
---

I wrote a blog post four years ago called ['organised bioinformatics
experiments'][1] describing my methods for maintaining computational projects.
This approach used databases to manage data and the Ruby equivalent of GNU Make
for organising *in-silico* analysis steps. I used this approach for several
years after describing it, and several people have generously said that this
post influenced the way they worked.

In the last few months I have been influenced by [an excellent talk on
computational complexity by Rich Hickey][talk]. This talk lead me to spend some
time further thinking about how I construct my computational workflows. This
has since lead me to move away from my 'organised bioinformatics experiments'
approach and change the way I work.

In this and subsequent posts I'm going to deconstruct my previous approach and
then outline what I think is a simpler approach for organising research
workflows. Given the inspiration I received from Rich Hickey's talk I've named
this series of posts "decomplected computational workflows."

[1]: /post/organised-bioinformatics-experiments/

## Reproducibility and Organisation

If you have done computational research for any length of time you know there
is an underlying problem of organising the files and steps in a workflow. An
example of this problem is writing a Perl script at the start of your PhD and
then remembering what this script does several years later as you finish your
thesis. How do you effectively organise hundreds of files and scripts over the
months or years of a research project?

Wet lab scientists track all of their experiments in a lab notebook. This
produces a record of the steps taken in their research that allows someone else
to reproduce their experiments. There is a similar requirement in computational
research but there is no simple *in-silico* analogy to a laboratory notebook.
How do I effectively reproduce my research from a set of scripts I may not have
looked at for a month? How do I organise all my scripts, data, and output
figures in the project? I think this question contains two parts:

  * **Reproducibility**:

    A research project maps input data into a tractable format, runs analyses
    on these data, then generates a set of output figures and statistics. The
    difficulty in making a project reproducible is that all scripts must be run
    in the correct order. Furthermore if the code in an earlier step changes
    then all subsequent downstream steps must be rerun. This process is fragile
    and can lead to errors and omissions.

  * **Organisation**:

    Research projects starting with an inkling of idea can rapidly grow into
    large numbers of scripts. How can these large numbers of related files be
    assembled in a project? How should data, figures and images be labelled? A
    well organised project should be able to be returned to after several
    months and the components understood with little effort.

## Complected bioinformatics experiments 

In my previous description of [organised bioinformatics experiments][1] I aimed
to address these problems using a systematic approach:

  * **Databases**: All data should be entered into a database at the start of a
    project. This keeps the data in a consistently accessible format.
    Denormalisation of data makes integrating data from different sources
    easier.

  * **Object Relational Management**: Object relational mapping (ORM)
    encapsulates database tables as object classes and table records are
    instances of these classes. The data in the project should only be
    available to analysis steps via these Ruby ORM classes. This makes accessing
    the data easier than SQL statements and all data-related code is in the
    same location.

  * **Rake**: Rake is a build tool similar to GNU Make written in Ruby. In a
    research project each step should be defined as a Rake task. Parts of the
    project are divided into incrementally numbered sub directories based on
    their order in the project. This means all analytic code is found in
    Rakefiles and provides a consistent organisation.

You can find [an example project][2] organised this way on github. I think this
approach satisfies both of the requirements I outlined above. The analyses are
strictly organised into Rakefiles enforcing the requirement for the project
steps being called in the correct order. Secondly the project is well organised
as the data is kept in the database, access is only through Ruby ORM classes,
and all the analysis logic is in the Rakefiles. Nevertheless I found over time
there are some downsides to this approach, and that they originate from
complexity.

[2]: https://github.com/michaelbarton/organised_experiments

  * **Tied to a specific programming language**: Everything must be written in
    Ruby. This makes it harder to include different programming languages. This
    can be worked around by calling secondary scripts using the shell from
    inside the Rakefile. Maintaining different shell scripts however adds
    complexity because the analysis has now moved out of the Rakefile into
    separate locations.

  * **All data in a database**: Database joins can be used to create composite
    data sets from different sources more easily. Using a database
    unconditionally for all data however adds complexity in the extra layer of
    code required to manage and manipulate the data. Furthermore the data is
    effectively hidden. To see and get a feel for it you'll need to use a
    database viewer and SQL.

  * **Mutable project state**: Changing files or database tables in different
    project steps adds mutability to a project. What state is the project in at
    any given time? If you create a database table in one step add an
    additional column in a later step, then current state of the table must be
    tracked, adding complexity.

The 'organised bioinformatics approach' makes reproducing and organising a
project easier. I however think it does not make it simpler. Using Rakefiles
makes it easy to run `rake` to repeat all project analyses but adds what I
think is a great deal of complexity. This complexity is manifest as the project
becoming increasing hard to maintain as it grows. Feeling a sense of resistance
when trying to change or update a workflow step is a sign of complexity.
Therefore this has lead me to think that in addition to reproducibility and
organisation, computational workflows have an additional requirement:

  * **Simplicity**:

  Computational analysis pipelines should be simple to maintain. This
  simplicity should make be manifest as making it trivial to add, update, or
  remove steps in the workflow.

In the [Rich Hickey's talk][talk], he argues is that we should prefer simple
over easy, as adding large catch-all tools to a project can make analysis
easier but can lead to increasing complexity and maintenance. Choosing simpler
or less tools, in contrast, may require more effort to create a project but
makes maintenance simpler in the longer term. Rich uses the term "complecting"
to describe how braiding more and more software into the project results in
greater and greater complexity. Therefore with respect to this I going to
describe the following series of posts as "Decomplected Computational
Workflows." These posts will described how I use [Makefiles][], language
agnostic functions, immutable data, and modularised projects to reduce the
complexity in my computational research.

[talk]: http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy
[Makefiles]: /post/decomplected-workflows-makefiles/
