---
tags: post
feed: false
title: About Writing
date: 2007-03-02
---

You love making programs that reveal yourself as a programming god. You produce
results that demonstrate you are, quite obviously, the greatest scientist of
our generation. You show these to everyone in your office/corridor/family, they
all appreciate your magnificence. After a few talks at conferences comes the
bit you've been avoiding - writing everything up.

I think I'm fair in saying that you went into bioinformatics for something
other than writing reports and papers. At some point though, you have to.

<strong>Set a daily goal</strong>

When I have to write, I set a goal of 500 words a day. Even if they are
complete nonsense, which they usually are. Writing, like everything else, gets
better with practice. My writing usually becomes more coherent, the more I do.
Once you've got everything written, even if it's rubbish, you'll feel much
better. You can start editing for clarity later.

<strong>Throw away as much as possible</strong>

You've written huge amounts of text, so why bin all the effort? Because you're
writing for other people. Everyone one has to expend energy to read your work.
Think about how dull it is for you reading badly written text. It's a boring
activity that you have to force yourself to do. Now what if the document had
instead been composed with the reader in mind? The point is put across in clear
and simple terms. Every paragraph, sentence, word is there because it has to
be.

<strong>Learn how to write well</strong>

Writing, like presenting, is a skill that doesn't receive as much attention as
it should. Particularly in science where, quite rightly, the emphasis is
scientific method and ability. But once you have your results, you need to
communicate them. I've found that becoming better at writing makes you more
confident, making writing more enjoyable and a less arduous task. To this end,
I recommend Strunk and White, "The elements of style". Fortunately, this book
is also available <a href="http://www.bartleby.com/141/">online</a>. Also check
out this <a href="http://www.scalzi.com/whatever/004023.html">page</a> for a
practical introduction to writing.

Finally, if you're taking one thing away from this post, please take this.

<blockquote>Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain no
unnecessary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason
that a drawing should have no unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary
parts. This requires not that the writer make all his sentences short, or that
he avoid all detail and treat his subjects only in outline, but that every word
tell. <strong>William Strunk Jr., Elements of Style</strong></blockquote>

Forty two words were thrown away in revising this post.
