---
tags: post
feed: false
title: "Poster: Scaffolder software for genome finishing"
date: 2011-07-07
---

I've spent time recently working on [a tool to simplify genome
scaffolding][post]. I presented a poster on this at this year's American
Society for Microbiology conference (ASM 2011). I find poster sessions at large
conferences sometimes overwhelming. There are many posters and it can be hard to
find the most relevant.

Similarly, from the opposite side, being overlooked in a room with hundreds of
other posters is disheartening. I think creating and presenting a poster about
software is an even harder task. Software is an abstract concept so it's
difficult to relay a narrative that poster viewers will connect with. Contrast
this with presenting research which benefits from a background, results,
discussion storyline and, possibly, eye-catching figures.

The poster I choose to create for ASM minimised the amount text on the page.
There is [extensive documentation on Scaffolder][scaf] so repeating this on the
poster felt redundant. I also believed that large amounts of text describing
the software would be forgotten. I designed the poster as a brief introduction
to the software. Anyone interested in learning more could follow the short URL
([http://next.gs][scaf]) to the website containing more details.

{% include 'image.njk',
  url: 'http://uk-me-michaelbarton.s3.amazonaws.com/posters/2011-asm/michael_barton_poster.png',
  alt: 'A poster illustrating my scaffolder software' %}

The left-hand side of the poster describes the problem of creating a genome by
joining the contigs manually. The larger right-hand side illustrates the
scaffolder file format and how my software solves these problems. If anyone
expressed an interest in learning more I ran through a two-minute talk using
the poster as a prop. I could then answer any additional questions. I think
this worked well as I was able to have several conversations with people about
their own genome projects.

The poster was simple to produce and took about one week. I created the poster
in Inkscape and the design is composed mainly of simple shapes and text. When
I struggled to produce any part of my envisaged design a Google search found
plenty of Inkscape tutorials. Overall I felt that an information light, but
visually appealing, design was the good way to attract interest in the software
and then start a conversation.

Zen Faulkes has generously provided a critique of this posters. He raised
excellent points about the using larger fonts and tidying up the title by
removing the circle designs. I encourage reading this [critique on his Better
Posters blog.][bp]

[bp]: http://betterposters.blogspot.com/2011/07/critique-scaffolder.html
[scaf]: http://next.gs
[post]: /post/experiments-in-genome-scaffolding-and-peer-review/
