---
tags: post
feed: false
title: Introduction to a career in bioinformatics
date: 2007-09-05
---

### Past

The current senior bioinformaticians of today, had no formal training in
bioinformatics. In the 1970s and 1980s there was no field of bioinformatics,
instead there were areas of biology that required substantial use of the
computer. Crystallographers had to write code to transform x-ray diffraction
data into molecular structure predictions; evolutionary biologists had to
create databases to store protein and DNA sequences produced by the
introduction of sequencing technology. Arguably this is where the field of
bioinformatics began, and is why structure and sequence analysis used to be
the majority.

Now, students entering the field have formal training, and their backgrounds
can be roughly divided into two categories: computer scientists who enjoyed
biology at school and are interested in tackling biological problems, and
biologists who are handy with computers and fancy taking this from a hobby to
a profession. There are scientists with backgrounds in statistics, maths, and
physics, but in my experience these are in the minority compared to biologists
and computer scientists.

The usual entry to the field is via a masters degree, which most universities
offer. A masters in bioinformatics is conversion course that teaches computer
scientists the required biology, and biologists the essential computing
skills, such as programming. Since very few students have a strong
understanding of both computers and biology, the aim these courses is to make
sure they leave with a basic understanding of both, as well as familiarity
with current topics in bioinformatics research. The structure of a
bioinformatics masters is usually a combination of lectures and practicals,
with a large research project.

It is debatable which type of background, biology or computing science, is
more advantageous. Biologists have several years of biological knowledge and
experience writing scientific papers. Computer scientists on the other hand,
have the advantage of understanding all things informatics, which has a steep
learning curve for the biologist who has never programmed before.

### Future

So once you have your master's degree, and you've decided that bioinformatics
is what you'd like to spend your immediate future doing, what can you expect?
Given the hype, bioinformatics is still a job like any other, where over a
long enough period of time, day-to-day work can border on the mundane. Also,
as a scientist the amount of time you'll spend writing code or producing
results will decrease as you further your career. More and more time will be
required for reading, reviewing, and writing grants and papers. If you
eventually become a university professor you'll also have to manage your own
research group which may or not be your idea of a good time.

Personally, what makes me stay in the field is how interesting the problems
are, and the independence I have in solving them. When I find a question I'm
interested in, I can use my initiative to answer it in the way I think best.
I'll usually then discuss the results with my colleagues or supervisor to get
their opinion. The best thing for me is that, after specialising in data
mining and statistics, I can start to do things that other people can't, which
means other people approach me to ask for my opinion on their problem - which
is quite satisfying.

### Career path

When people refer to the field of bioinformatics, they're referring to what
might be aruged as two overlapping areas. The first is what you would call
"bioinformatics", which is more technical, and examples are creating tools to
analyse data for biologists, or specific databases to store and retrieve
information. For example if you created a new tool that could analyse
sequencing in a way that hasn't been done previously, then this is
bioinformatics. Many journals such as Nature and Bioinformatics, have sections
purely for articles about new methods and tools.

The second path is what you might call "computational biology", which is all
about doing biological research, using a computer instead of a pipette. A
strong understanding of biology is important, as well as the ability to
phrase, then answer a research question. For example, if you believed that
duplicate genes were less well conserved compared with non-duplicates, and you
tested this hypothesis across a set of genomes, then this would be
computational biology.

These two fields are not distinct, and overlap a fair amount. Some
universities have bioinformatics departments in both the computer science and
life science faculties, indicating the types of research carried out in each.

### Salary

Salary is the most over hyped part of a bioinformatics career. You're never
going to be earning six figures unless you're a senior professor or can do
something that very few others can, which also has some commercial
application. As an example, if you have developed a new method that can
predict molecular interactions in the human body, this can prevent wasted
research and save a drug company a fair amount of money. However, being able
to parse BLAST reports for orthologs to a candidate gene, while undeniably
useful, does not have commercial potential.

Overall, searching around on the Internet shows that, in industry,
bioinformaticians are relatively poorly paid compared to other IT
professionals, while relatively better paid compared to life scientists. So it
depends on which of those two you prefer to judge yourself by.

On the other hand, if you're working in academia, then you'll be paid a
similar amount to scientists at your level, e.g. PhD student, post-doc, or
professor. However, if you do work in academia then you're probably not doing
it to pay for your playboy lifestyle.

### Industry vs Academia

This brings me to my last point, there are two different career paths for
bioinformatics, working in academia or in industry.

In academia, the career path is something like PhD student, post-doc, fellow,
principle investigator, and then professor. The numbers at each stage are
dramatically reduced, and an indication of the attrition that takes place. The
early part of a career in academia is judged on how many papers published,
while later as you become a group leader, the amount of money brought in
through applying for grants becomes equally important. An academic career is
less secure, but you have the benefit of being able to work on whatever you
want, as long as you're successful.

In industry, you have less freedom to work on what you choose, you work on
what your employer wants, but to balance this you have greater job security.
The commercial nature of industrial research means that publishing papers is
secondary, or prohibited in the case of sensitive material, which can make the
move from industry to academia some what difficult.

### Summary

So, these are my thoughts on a bioinformatics career. Bear in mind this is
completely subjective. If you like computers, biology, and solving problems,
then bioinformatics is probably worth a go. Just try to be realistic about
your expectations, and don't pay too much attention to the hype.
