---
tags: post
title: The case for open science
date: 2007-06-17
---

Traditional science is carried out by experimentation, interpreting the results
in respect to the hypothesis, and repeating this until publication. Publication
is everything, and as such it's important to keep your research secret, in fear
of anyone publish something similar which undermines the opportunity to publish
in a high impact journal.

An open science philosophy says that this closed approach slows scientific
advancement. Results should be made available as soon as possible, then
everyone in the field can benefit from them sooner. There is no delay for peer
review and publication.

### Why you should participate in open science

A pure motivation is sharing knowledge for knowledge's sake. Other scientists
get access to your research faster. This can prevent groups working on
overlapping topics, or research that would be invalidated by new results. Both
are possible scenarios, given the time between discovery and publication.

There are also more selfish benefits of open science. Scientists are always
more than willing to give their opinion. Imagine you discussed on your website
a hypothesis about a gene, and you planned to test it by expressing it in
E.coli. Then another researcher, reading your site, wrote to tell you that they
had tried to the same but had been unable to. This would save you a lot of time
by preventing you from repeating the same mistake. This isn't a hypothetical
situation though, this is exactly what happened on <a
href="http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com/2007/05/which-e-coli-is-best.html">Rosie
Redfield's research blog</a>. This is just one scenario. People willing to tell
you a better way to perform an experiment, or alternative interpretations of
results are other possible benefits for the researcher willing to publicize
their results and ideas early.

### Why you should shun open science

There's one very obvious reason for being cautious about making your results
public before you publish - will people steal your research for their own
benefit? Unfortunately the answer to that is likely to be yes. While we would
like to think that everyone would be honest enough to acknowledge your work if
they use it, some won't. The nature of the scientific game means that we get
points for publishing in important journals, and the more points we get the
better the scientist we're regarded as. If someone can increase the
significance of their work by repeating your analysis, as their own, then
there's always the possibility they might. I don't think we should be surprised
at this, since this is the way the system is set up, and until we can come up
with a better one this always likely to happen.

There are also other people that have a stake in whether you make your research
publicly available. Your work is likely sponsored by a research council or
funding body. Your institution gives you a place to carry out your work.
Co-researchers contribute time and data to the project. All have something to
lose if you're risky with your research, and are scooped. They all may be less
willing to work with you as a result.

There is one last point to consider. If you make public a figure that describes
your research, that figure may then be ineligible for publication - similarly
for conclusions, and interpretation of data. Journals have different policies
on what researchers can make available prior to publication. It's worth taking
a moment to consider this before putting data on a website.

### A middle way

Despite all this I am very in favour of open science, and would like to make
all my research available for any one who is interested. However the reasons
against are considerable, and should not be ignored. But after speaking to
other people in my department, we've come up with a middle way.

There are always experiments that don't work out. The results were
inconclusive, I have no idea of how to interpret the results, or the experiment
just didn't work. I've got nothing to lose by making this data publicly
available, I'm not going anywhere with them anyway. However, that's not to say
they might not be useful to someone else, or even better somebody could give me
their opinion on where I've gone wrong. I think this could be a good start for
my experimentation with open science.
