---
tags: post
feed: false
title: Be more productive - throw away your mouse
date: 2007-08-22
---

The mouse, or two dimensional motion pointing device, is undoubtedly useful,
especially when you're new to computers. It lets you open windows, click
around, and explore. However the more time you spend using a computer, and the
more proficient you become, the more the mouse becomes a hindrance to how fast
you can work.

In a simplistic sense, using the keyboard the majority of the time saves your
elbow. Regular switching between the keyboard and the mouse will give you
repetitive strain injury, I know because I get a dull ache in my right elbow
and wrist when I'm doing it too much. Usually mice are not the best shape
either, it rotates your wrist about 135 degrees wise to your elbow: put your
hand on your mouse and have a look.

The real advantage from using the keyboard, is that it allows you to work much
faster. If you know the keyboard shortcuts for the five top actions you usually
use the mouse for, I think you'll be surprised at how much faster you can work.
For example, in your code editor, useful keyboard commands to know could be:
switch between files, compile and run the code, auto-complete, copy an entire
line, and code reformat.

### The Command Line

In my opinion, if you're a bioinformatician you need to know how to use command
line. Powerful and versatile, this is the program I use most. Just about
anything you do with your mouse, you can do a whole lot faster with the command
line. Manipulating files, changing directories, and selectively performing
actions based file type, the list is long. Getting used to the command line has
a learning curve but the investment is very worthwhile, the returns in the
speed at which you perform actions will mean you never look back. If you're
using Linux, you're probably already familiar with using the console, on a Mac
you'll need to look in /Applications/Utilities for terminal. Windows Vista
users have something similar in Command Shell, or if you're an XP user I
recommend downloading cygwin.

### Vim

If you've ever given vim a try, you probably think that it makes no sense to
anyone except Unix administrators, and it's true that the learning curve is
steep. Vim is an entirely keyboard operated text editor. As with the command
line, I would say that the investment is entirely worth it, once you understand
how to use vim, you'll have an extremely useful tool at your disposal. What
makes vim special for me is that all text editing actions can performed by
chaining a series of single character commands together. For example typing
"/vi" will take me to the next instance of the characters 'vi', then typing
"2dw" will delete the next two words. Reading this, you might make it sound a
bit of novelty, but imagine all the times you have to click around in Word,
instead replaced with a few simple commands run from the keyboard. I do all my
text editing in vim, including writing this blog post. To get started with vim
have a look around on the web, or try the tutorial by typing "vimtutor" at the
command line.

My message for this post is simple, keyboard good, mouse bad. Try to use the
keyboard as much as possible, find the common keyboard shortcuts for your
favourite programs, and use the command line. Hopefully you'll see the rewards
in how you work.
