---
feed: false
tags: post
title: What's the point of publishing?
date: 2013-02-27
---

What is the point of publishing? I think the answer most would give to this
question would be 'because I have to.' You have to publish because a CV or
resume full of publications allows to keep your job, apply for a new job,
become a professor, and get tenure. I feel this myself and this need has become
conflated with the desire to publish my research because I want to share it
with the world. Pragmatically though I must regularly publish if one day I hope
to see myself as a tenured professor.

Another answer a more career-secure researcher would give for publishing is 'to
share research among scientists.' This is the reason journals were created so
that large paper books could be distributed to universities. I am old enough to
remember going to the library to physically photocopy the journal articles I
wanted. A more specific question is then, given we have the Internet and many
journals have become online only, 'What is the point of publishing now?'

If a group of scientists were to come together to create a solution for sharing
research would the current situation be close? That we spend weeks formatting
research into Microsoft Word, or LaTeX if you're lucky, for third-party
publishers that will, after months or even years, eventually decide to
disseminate to everyone. If our research is declined we then have to repeat
this process for a different third-party publisher. Once this research is
finally accepted many publishers will then charge scientists to finally get
access to it.

This pay-for-papers situation means that many poorer institutions cannot access
current research because they cannot afford the monthly subscription for the
articles. You might think that perhaps these poorer institutions are mostly in
the third-world. However if you have ever had to ask a colleague for a PDF then
you are working at one of these poorer institutions. I think the list of
non-poor institutions that have access to every journal subscription a
researcher could need is very small or perhaps even 0.

You could argue then that open access publishers are fixing this situation.
Open access journals charge researchers for publishing an article but then make
the article free to access for everyone. There are still, however, limitations
to open-access publication. For instance can you perform large scale analysis on
the huge amounts of scientific data these open-access journals contain? Can you
access structured citation data for these open-access journals?

A good question might be "who needs access to this large quantity of data?"
Which scientist needs the citation information for all published articles? The
answer is almost no one. The reason is the same for why most people don't need
to download the entire web to their computer. You only need to download the web
pages you're interested in. One group that does however need to download the
entire web is Google. Their algorithm searches every web page to see which
pages are linking to each other. This algorithm then identifies the top search
results because they have many incoming links from other pages. Unfortunately
there is no equivalent of Google for scientific publications. So while I can
search the web an optimised search algorithm I am stuck in pre-Google days for
searching the world's research. All because the research is siloed across many
individual journals.

A solution to the slow publication time of journals is to use pre-print
servers. This means uploading your research to a different third-party that
will make your research available to the community until it is more formally
published in a journal. This situation means we have acknowledged that the
journals so slow at publishing that we must an additional third-party to take
up the slack. If we are becoming more happy using pre-print servers to share
research doesn't this mean that publishers are a becoming a vestige from a
pre-Internet period?

You could argue that publishers provide an important a role in screening
research through peer-review and journal exclusivity. However both of these
functions are performed by academics rather than journals. So if academics are
performing the necessary peer-review why do still need the journals? Is the
lack of will to organise ourselves a good enough reason to put up with all the
inefficiency, effort and costs that publishers bring?

Do we expect that the current status quo for sharing scientific research will
still be the same 20, 50 or 100 years from now? If the answer to this is no,
then why do we settle for it now?
