---
feed: false
tags: post
title: "World of Bioinformatics Quest: Character generation"
date: 2008-01-28
---

In World of Bioinformatics Quest<sup>TM</sup> (WoBQ) having the right
character that suits your style is essential. You may think that a hot shot
Rubyist is the coolest class to be, but remember that you have to play this
character for the next 50 years. In general it's better to be a character that
you'll enjoy playing, rather than one that will get you more publications but
have less fun with. This page will guide you through all the parts of
character generation for WoBQ.

## Attributes

The attributes are the core of your character, they define which class you'll
best be able to play, and how you'll level up with that class. Getting the
right attributes is therefore critical, and playing to your strength will
result in more Papers<sup>TM</sup> and Grants<sup>TM</sup> - the scoring
system used in WoBQ.

#### Coding

Code defines the ability to write computer programs. There are many computer
languages available in WoBQ, and your coding ability determines how effective
your character will be using the language. A high coding ability means that
tasks can be quickly achieved, with a small likelyhood of bugs. A low coding
ability however means that writing computer code is an arduous activity and
won't necessarily end in the expected outcome. A mid range coding ability
minimum is import for most career choices as many analyses require a degree of
computational automation

#### Statistics

The statistics attribute governs the ability to draw quantitative conclusions
from numerical data. A lower statistical rating limits the character to using
spreadsheets to draw pie charts. A character with a high statistical rating
will be at ease with all classical statistics, as well as more difficult tasks
such as writing custom clustering algorithms to dissect specific multivariate
data sets.

#### Presenting/Writing

The Presenting/Writing ability controls how well the character is able to
articulate their research, whether this is giving a presentation, or writing
an article. Well presented and written research is able to reach and attract a
wider audience which ultimately results in a higher WoBQ publication score.

#### Research Focus

This ability determines how well the character is able to focus on the
research question and answer it in a context relevant to the current field. A
high rating in this results in insightful and timely research, while a low
rating lends the character to being distracted by irrelevant details, or
starting new research projects before previous ones have been completed.

#### Collaboration

This determines the ability to work with other researchers on joint projects.
A high collaboration rating means that each character will work to their
effective skills for the minimum amount of time to produce a focused piece of
research. Importantly, a high collaboration rating is useful for influencing
co-authors to allow your character first or last authorship.

## Career Paths

Once you've selected attributes for your character, you next have to choose
their class.

#### Linux Virtuoso - LV

The Linux virtuoso career path focuses on using open source software and
tools, but also taking advantage of the power of the Linux operating system.
Using a custom compiled kernel for their 8 core, 4 screen, hardware setup, the
LV is running all the latest versions of the biological databases, as well as
the latest bleeding edge analysis tools. The LV performs all their research at
the command line: vi edited bash scripts chained together using shell pipes.

#### Early Adopter - EA

Always working on the latest area of research, systems biology, synthetic
biology, personal genomics, this hype-wave surfer is riding the momentum of
the newest scientific topics. All the EA's scripts are available as web
services, which has to be the case since the EA has changed programming
language four times in the last three years. As for their data? All available
in OWL RDF from their web 2.0 ruby-on-rails blog thingy.

#### Old School - OS

In some respects, the opposite of the early adopter, the Old School has
singled minded determination to ask, then answer important research questions.
Blinkered to the change in tools and technologies, the Old School is doing
their analysis in Fortran on a Windows 95 Pentium II. Not to be underestimated
however, the lack of distraction means that they are totally research focused,
which is reflected by a WoBQ publication score multiplier.

#### Data Miner - DM

The most mysterious of all career paths, the DM is the master of all things
numerical and statistical. Their everyday tools are mixed effect regressions,
hidden Markov models, and the fearsome growing neural gas algorithm. Able to
produce a highly significant trend from a 1000 point random normal-normal
distribution, the DM is not short of collaborators. However beware if a DM is
in your audience during a talk, lest they curse your findings with
heteroscedasticity or non-normality.

#### Perfect Coder - PC

The perfect coder does exactly as the name implies, produces flawless,
bug-free programs. The exemplary use of descriptive variable names, comments,
and indentation produces code like poetry, and after a 5 second glance, even
your dog knows what the script does. Furthermore, design patterns, third-party
libraries, behaviour driven development and logging means that the PC doesn't
even know what the word 'bug' means. In short, reading the lisp written by the
PC feels like your wedding day and the birth of your first child rolled into
one.

#### Wet lab Bioinformatician - WB

A dry lab scientist, working in wet lab, the WB is the support for all things
computational biology in the laboratory. The WB is familiar enough with Perl
to create simple scripts, but the real strength of the WB doesn't lay in
writing code, but rather in using tools. While most bioinformaticians are
familiar, in theory, with how to find a gene of interest, the WB uses these
tools day in and day out - the WB puts many to shame on basic bioinformatics.
While others have their head in the clouds thinking about theories and
algorithms, the WB is getting his hands dirty with real data as it is being
produced.

## In game character traits

Whilst playing WoBQ, you will find that your character gains traits, all have
an effect some good, some bad. Here is a list of the ones you'll encounter
early on.

#### Agile programming

By adopting agile programming techniques, your character improves their
ability to write reusable and flexible code, resulting in an increase in their
coding ability

#### R

This free statistical software language has many useful functions for
statistics and data mining, as well as the excellent graphics library. The R
proficiency results in an increased statistical attribute.

#### Apple Hardware

Nice fonts, and easy to use programs like Keynote and Pages. I'm not on
commission, but there's a reason why graphic designers use Apple Macs.
Increased presenting/writing attributes for your character.

#### Good Supervisor

Having a supervisor for your character that will nurture and guide their
talent makes all the difference in their research, resulting in an increased
research focus attribute.

#### Open Notebook Science

Making their research open allows other scientists to get faster access, which
in turn spreads your research further. An Open Notebook Scientist has an
increased collaboration attribute.

#### Drinker

It's difficult to write usable code when your vision is blurry and are nursing
a hang over. Eight pints of special brew swiftly followed by a donor kebab
results in your character having a decreased coding attribute.

#### No statistics

Your character went into biology because they were no good at maths. Now the
inability to tell the difference between a Poisson distribution and a wet fish
results in a decreased statistics ability.

#### Blogger

Why isn't your character writing up their paper? Because they're writing a
ridiculous blog post on bioinformatics role playing games - decreased
presenting/writing attribute.

#### In Love

Who needs cold, hard ambition when you're off having romantic meals, and
kissing at the back of the cinema? Love never got anyone anywhere in science -
decreased research focus.

#### Bad Hygiene

Your character stinks. Worse than that time a skunk died in the air
conditioning vent. No one wants to go near them, let alone sit with them and
discuss research - penalised collaboration attribute.
